---
title: "1: Turbulence closures for complex reactions"
date: 2026-06-27
layout: post
mathjax: true
---
**A long-standing problem**\
Since completing my PhD in 1992, before that and a few times since, I have returned to the problem of modeling chemical reactions that are mixing-sensitive.  I had the pleasure to meet and work with John Bourne through BHR Group in the late 1980s and early 1990s and to meet Jerzy Baldyga a few times including in Dublin with Steve Hearn in the late nineties, in the early years of PFD (which became Scale-up Systems).  Building on practical findings by[^1] [Ed Paul[^1]](https://aiche.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/aic.690170340) of Merck & Co., Bourne and Baldyga laid a great foundation in the field, developed interesting mathematical models, established the kinetics of liquid-phase test reactions and linked the results of mixing-sensitive reactions with fluid mechanics and energy dissipation rates. The field was developed separately in the [combustion world[^2]](https://tcg.mae.cornell.edu/pubs/Pope_PCI_90.pdf) where there was an early emphasis on CFD and closure models dealt primarily with steady-state problems in gases, with less at that time on chemical kinetics and more on energy output and turbulence modeling.

Modeling these systems allows ideas to be tested against experimental data and to establish whether the model and the theory behind it is true.  For good models that leads to intuitions of what variables affect the result and that guides problem-solving and design of experiments to solve problems.  A challenge to going further and predicting real industrially useful system behaviour quantitatively has always been the availability of chemical kinetic parameters; because at least some of the chemistry is fast but not instantaneous, special experimental setups are required. Computer power also remains a limiter even in 2026, especially when dealing with transient systems and using CFD with large computational grids.

In these posts I will discuss some practical methods available, especially those from Baldyga's group, list current gaps where I know them and report on some computational research I have been doing (in my spare time!) to clarify details and explore gaps. The material should be interesting for anyone making fine/ specialty chemicals or pharmaceutical active ingredients using organic synthesis and to the broad community of system modelers and CFD users.

The original Lagrangian (follow the flow) models of Bourne and Balydga (including the EDD and E models) rely on a simple flow path and are not immediately suitable for integration with CFD.  Dynochem's extensive [model library[^3]](https://dcresources.scale-up.com/?q=reactive+mixing) includes implementations of these models, assuming plug flow in a reaction zone.  

Balydga began to publish models formally named "closures" starting in [1989[^4]](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0009250989870162); these were immediately usable in CFD programs (via user subroutines).  However closures were available only for specific chemical reaction schemes, first a single reaction, later azo-coupling type reactions (competitive-consecutive), then parallel reactions and finally in [2009[^5]](https://yadda.icm.edu.pl/baztech/element/bwmeta1.element.baztech-article-BPS2-0052-0074/c/Polish_Journal_of_Chemical_Technology_2_2009_Baldyga.pdf) a combination of competitive-consecutive and competitive-parallel reactions. Users with other types of reaction scheme could choose to apply these models as a surrogate of a real system, but did not know how to model their actual reaction system.  A very thorough extension of the 2009 work was published by Baldyga'a colleagues in [2025[^6]](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1385894725023320) and it was actually reading that paper early in 2026 that rekindled my personal interest in these closure type models.  Apart from a multi-stage decay of concentration variance, the concept of a stoichiometric mixture is central to Baldyga's closure ideas.  Stoichiometric mixtures arises quite often in daily life, whenever we need to know how much of something we need to get a job done. I am sure we would have much more from Jerzy Baldyga by now if he had not [passed away](https://journals.pan.pl/Content/113700/PDF/01_CPE_4_2019_INTERNET.pdf?handler=pdf#:~:text=Professor%20Jerzy%20Bałdyga%20passed%20away,engineering%20and%20multiphase%20process%20subjects.) in 2019. I will refer to even recent work by his colleagues as being from "Baldyga's group". I am glad to be in contact with his co-author and former colleague Magdalena Jasińska in Baldyga's group.

Considering fed batch reactions with fast kinetics, the reaction is highly localized near the feed and CFD models would waste considerable energy integrating equations throughout the bulk where no reaction is actually happening.  About 20 years ago, I developed a zone model for such systems with time constants from Baldyga and Bourne but representing the reaction zone as a single separate compartment from the bulk, in which a stoichiometric amount of feed and bulk reactants had entered. The dimensions of the zone depend on the mixing rate and it grows or shrinks as needed to reflect changing conditions. That type of model is also available in the Dynochem library. 

This series of posts will get technical very quickly and be a bit like a diary of things I explored and tried when thinking about this problem again recently.  Some worked and some did not.  I will use the 2025 paper's 5-reaction azo-coupling chemistry as my main illustration and start in the next post with more detail, equations and code.  After considerable effort and a lot of reading, thinking and coding, I have been lucky enough to find one new and impactful method and result.
