---
title: "5: Other methods for bracketing C(f)"
date: 2026-07-01
layout: post
mathjax: true
---

**Motivation**

For the 5-reaction azo-coupling there are 32 limits or 31 excluding the no-reaction limit.  Blend_fs as described in the 2025 paper and previous posts uses only two of these 31 limits, in combination with each other. For general-purpose application of a closure, it is desirable to consider all of the limits as some may be highly relevant depending on kinetics, reactant amounts and mixing. This motivates the search for a general approach that in principle can adhere to any of the limits or a combination, depending on the current conditions; and that can be applied to any reaction scheme or system.

**Linear interpolation between nearest limits**

The idea: Baldyga's closures use the average solution concentration to interpolate between pairs of limits. If the interpolation limits were closer together, it might be possible to obtain tighter bracketing and thereby a more accurate estimate of C(f).  This might be achieved by considering all possible subsets and their limits and interpolating using the average concentration between the limits that most closely bracket the average.

**Linear interpolation between maximum and minimum limits**

The idea: In order to give a closure maximum scope to "find" the right C(f) as it solves, one could use only the maximum and minimum limits as bracketing values.

**Linear combination of all limits**

The idea: In order to ensure that the closure keeps in mind all possible values of all limits at any time, one could estimate C(f) as a linear combination of all of the limits based on the proximity of the mean to each of those limits.

**Linear interpolation between mixing line and nearest limit**

The idea: one could fix one interpolation limit as the mixing line and find the nearest other limit that brackets the average concentration. Then interpolate between these.

**Blended limits**

The idea: One could generalize the Baldyga approach of blending a combination of limits. Possibilities include identifying subsets that are missing products and weighting those limits base on the products they produce.

**A new idea that appears to be generally applicable**
