---
title: "10: Differences between blend_fs and ray_limit"
date: 2026-07-08
layout: post
mathjax: true
---

I will discuss here some fundamental differences between the new ray_limit closure and the blend_fs / 2025 closure. I will illustrate those discussions with results generated by my implementations of both blend_fs and ray_limit.  Then I show that an extended version of the 2025 closure behaves better than blend_fs and agrees exactly with ray_limit.

**Clamping**

During integration of the ODEs using blend_fs, the ODE solution deviates from the limits defined in blend_fs (aligned with the 2025 paper). We can see that in the evolution of the average species profiles (red dashed line) versus time when overlaid with the current values of the limits (bold curves). 

This is also evident in snapshot plots of C(f) in which the ODE solution (flat line) does not equal the beta-averaged C(f); that is because I clamp C(f) to remain at the physical limit even if the ODE solution has gone outside that limit.

I generated plots showing the percentage of ODE timesteps for each species that were clamped with blend_fs. 

Clamping occurs to a significant extent over the whole range of epsilon and is most prevalent for species B and R (S is not relevant to calculation of rates in this example). 

Clamping does not occur in this example and in most other cases I have studied when using ray_limit.  Clamping is avoided using ray_limit by definition / by construction. The infinitely fast reaction has always proceeded further along the ray than the current reaction with finite kinetics.

**Position of fs**

blend_fs calculates the current (moving) fs from limits 20 (fs=0.1379) and 31 (fs=0.1935), the same limits used in the 2025 paper.  I generate plots of the evolution of fs versus time in each ODE solution when using blend_fs.

I also generate plots of the final fs at each epsilon during an epsilon sweep.

It is clear that fs moves from near 0.1935 at low epsilon, reflecting slow mixing and high production of S, towards 0.1379 at intermediate and high epsilon, reflecting faster mixing and less production of both S and Q.

I believe that in this example, fs need to be allowed to move across a wider range than this, as with increasing epsilon, reaction 5 is no longer behaving similarly (in terms of speed) to reactions 1 and 3, with more R and T and less Q being produced.  I believe that additional limits should be considered in this closure that allow A and B to react more preferentially towards R and T than towards Q. In my terminology, those would be limit 7 (fs=0.0741) especially and possibly also limit 26 (fs=0.1379).

I also plot the evolution of fs when using ray_limit. 

I have compared the variation of fs using ray_limit with blend_fs and it is clear that ray_limit allows C(f) to adopt a smooth variation from almost 0.1935 down to near 0.0741.

The evolution of fs using ray_limit is automatic and the limits do not even need to be calculated up front.

**Extending the closure from the 2025 paper**

Having worked on ray_limit and spent more time than I should on this topic, I realized that the closure presented in the 2025 paper as Equation 41 can be broadened in scope compared to the 2025 paper by combining all three (actually five) reactions into a single stoichiometrically correct line, much like ray limit does.

Equation 41 states:

$$f_{s}=\frac{(1+\beta)C_{B0}+C_{C0}}{C_{A0}+(1+\beta)C_{B0}+C_{C0}}$$

That is based on a reaction scheme in Equations 32 and 33 that combines A+B>R and A+R>S with extent 1 mole for the first line and $\beta$ moles for the second, taken together with A+C>Q:

$$(1+\beta) A + B > (1-\beta) R + \beta S$$

$$A + C > Q$$

A broader statement of these reactions in which Q formation proceeds to extent $\gamma$ is:

$$(1+\beta+\gamma) A + B + \gamma C > (1-\beta) R + \beta S + \gamma Q$$

That reaction will have a moving $f_{s}$ that differs from the 2025 paper's version of the equation and can in principle span a wider range of reaction conditions, including those where the Q-forming reaction does not proceed significantly; generalizing the extent of reaction 1 to $\alpha$:

$$(\alpha+\beta+\gamma) A + \alpha B + \gamma C > (\alpha-\beta) R + \beta S + \gamma Q$$

$$f_{s}=\frac{(\alpha+\beta+\gamma)\min(C_{B0}/\alpha, C_{C0}/\gamma)}{C_{A0}+(\alpha+\beta+\gamma)\min(C_{B0}/\alpha, C_{C0}/\gamma)}$$

With $\alpha=1$ and $\gamma=1$ this becomes equivalent to Equation (41). 

I believe that this line of reasoning can be generalized to any set of reactions but have not seen that written anywhere before.  In the more involved case of the 5-reaction system we are using for illustration, additional reactions A+B>T and A+T>S take place.  The scheme is now: A+B>R, A+R>S, A+B>T, A+T>S, A+C>Q and denoting the extents as $\alpha$, $\beta$, $\gamma$, $\delta$ and $\epsilon$ respectively: 

$$(\alpha+\beta+\gamma+\delta+\epsilon) A + (\alpha+\gamma) B + \epsilon C > (\alpha-\beta) R + (\gamma-\delta) T + (\beta+\delta) S + \epsilon Q$$

$$f_{s}=\frac{(\alpha+\beta+\gamma+\delta+\epsilon)\min(C_{B0}/(\alpha+\gamma), C_{C0}/\epsilon)}{C_{A0}+(\alpha+\beta+\gamma+\delta+\epsilon)\min(C_{B0}/(\alpha+\gamma), C_{C0}/\epsilon)}$$

With $\alpha=1$, $\gamma=0$, $\delta=0$ and $\epsilon=1$ this becomes equivalent to Equation (41). 

This extended version of the 2025 paper's closure is strikingly similar to the ray_limit closure I have been using.  Both approaches dynamically collapse the entire reaction system onto a single line reaction that is stoichiometrically correct at the current time.  Infinitely fast reaction limits can be obtained from the single reaction and used to bound the estimates we need of C(f) with the no-reaction limit / mixing line bounding C(f) on the other side.

It is important to note that the extended version of the 2025 paper's approach is not described in the 2025 paper or the prior 2009 paper.  Nevertheless, it appears to be quite generally applicable, as any reaction system may be written in this single-line form.

**Results with extended_2025 closure**

I decided to implement this extended_2025 closure approach in my code. When starting, I wanted to access extent of reaction information for each line and then construct $f_{s}$ and the "tent" plots for each species dynamically using the full stoichiometric matrix as the solution proceeded. I realized that I did not need to do that work in order to use the closure.  The extent of the single reaction may be calculated exactly from the amount of each reactant that has disappeared and product that has formed, relative to the mixing line; there is no need to tease out the extents of each reaction line.  It is exactly equivalent to the complex equation above to use the ODE solution for the mole balance on each component to determine the overall reaction equation:

$$ \frac{C_{A}-C_{A}^{0}}{-1} A + \frac{C_{B}-C_{B}^{0}}{-1} B + \frac{C_{C}-C_{C}^{0}}{-1} C = \frac{C_{R}-C_{R}^{0}}{1} R + \frac{C_{T}-C_{T}^{0}}{1} T + \frac{C_{S}-C_{S}^{0}}{1} S + \frac{C_{Q}-C_{Q}^{0}}{1} Q $$

It was now obvious to me that this extended version of the C(f) closure in the 2025 paper would require identical code and also give identical results to my existing ray_limit approach, which also collapses the reaction system dynamically in a similar way and then finds the infintely fast limit of the overall reaction.  I still gave the approach its own separate name within the code, "extend_2025", but ultimately results obtained are the same as for ray_limit.

This journey also made me question whether the extended equations given above were in fact the equations used when Figure 11 b) of the 2025 paper was produced.  I will know more about this when I see the code used for the results presented in the 2025 paper. As we have seen, the extended equations and ray_limit lead to much better behaviour of the solution, with no clamping and a smooth movement of fs over the whole range of epsilon.  Ray_limit calculations already agree very well with Figure 11 b) from the 2025 paper. 

Although it adds little value to the discussion at this point, I demonstrate below the identical nature of the results obtained with extend_2025 and ray_limit.

