---
title: "7: Ray_limit"
date: 2026-07-04
layout: post
mathjax: true
---
**A new closure idea that appears to be generally applicable**

It became clear when considering the various methods described in post 6 (and others) that if the profile of C(f) is not well-bracketed and respecting physical limits, closures will not work well. Expecting the solution to "find" the right bracketing limits on its own from the precomputed static subsets is not realistic and additional information needs to come from somewhere in order to navigate subset-space and f-space.  Rationally combined or blended and dynamic limits, such as those in the 2009 and 2025 papers from Baldyga's group, looked more promising, although potentially internally inconsistent if the selected limits did not always bound the ODE average at all times. And it is not yet clear how such a combination could be determined and applied in a general or automatic way to a new and user-defined reaction system that differs significantly from the azo-coupling example we are using for illustration.

While thinking about the extra information that might help a closure to produce the correct solution in all cases, I often thought about how the kinetic parameters in the scheme contain useful information about which static limits might be most relevant to a solution. That is also true of the reaction conditions, especially the input concentrations of each substance, which determine to some degree what reaction pathways are most active/relevant. None of the closures tried so far have made automated use of this information. I realized that it should be possible to extract from the ODE (or CFD) solution, which reflects all of these inputs, a trajectory that could be useful in defining the overall direction of the reactions in stoichiometric terms.  

As in Baldyga's 2009 and 2025 closure, a mechanistically correct reaction system containing multiple reaction lines can be written in a single line that is stoichiometrically correct, even if the chemistry does not take place mechanistically in a single step.  

I decided to use the ODE solution to determine the stoichiometric coefficients in that overall reaction and then push (or scale) conversion to maximum extent based on the reactants currently available. The idea was that this would form a single limit that represented a dynamic combination of subset limits from the static set and would bound C(f) on one side while the mixing line would bound C(f) on the other. In principle this method would always ensure that the beta-integrated mean equalled the ODE average, with no clamping.  A lucky advantage was it was not necessary in this method to even compute all of the subsets up front, although that is advisable and informative.

I called this method "ray_limit", because in mathematical terms it is extracting from the ODE solution a "ray" (or vector/arrow) that points in the direction in which the overall chemistry is moving. A detailed mathematical description is provided [here](https://joehannon.github.io/blog/2026/07/04/title_008.html).

Outcome: Plots and commentary will be here soon.
