---
title: "6: Other methods for bracketing C(f)"
date: 2026-07-01
layout: post
mathjax: true
---

**Motivation**

For the 5-reaction azo-coupling there are 32 limits or 31 excluding the no-reaction limit.  Blend_fs as described in the 2025 paper and previous posts uses only two of these 31 limits, in combination with each other. For general-purpose application of a closure, it is desirable to consider all of the limits as some may become relevant depending on kinetics, reactant amounts and mixing. This motivates the search for a general approach that in principle can adhere to any of the limits or a combination, depending on the current conditions; and that can be applied to any reaction scheme or system.

**Linear interpolation between nearest limits**

Idea: Baldyga's closures use the average solution concentration to interpolate between pairs of limits. If the interpolation limits were closer together, it might be possible to obtain tighter bracketing and thereby a more accurate estimate of C(f).  This might be achieved by considering all possible subsets and their limits and interpolating using the average concentration between the limits that most closely bracket the average.

Outcome: This method produces species and reaction rate profiles that are continuous but may contain abrupt changes as the bracketing limits change during solution of the equations.  It never clamps.  It produces the correct XQ and XS at either end of an epsilon sweep, but the XQ curve contains unphysical bumps at intermediate epsilon.  It remains in the code as an illustration and a point of reference.

ODE solution at 1 W/kg compared with blend_fs

Results of an epsilon sweep, compared with blend_fs

**Linear interpolation between maximum and minimum limits**

Idea: In order to give a closure maximum scope to "find" the right C(f) as it solves, one could use only the maximum and minimum limits for each species as bracketing values, ensuring where possible that the beta-averaged C(f) equals the average value from the ODE. By definition this method will not respect more than one correct fs limit at any time.

Outcome: Gave too much freedom to C(f) and left C(f) for some reactants well above zero at mixture fractions when it should be near zero.  When two poorly bracketed profiles are cross-multiplied to get reaction rate, deviations from physical limits become pronounced.  This method was not pursued.

**Linear combination of all limits**

Idea: In order to ensure that the closure keeps in mind all possible values of all limits at any time and might thereby "find" the correct limit, one could estimate C(f) as a linear combination of all of the limits based on the proximity of the species average value to the beta-average of each of those limits. A small iterative optimization (like sequential least squares, SLSQP) would be required to find the weights on each limit for each species.

Outcome: Produced C(f) line segments with multiple fs kinks and left C(f) for some reactants well above zero at mixture fractions when it should be near zero.  When two poorly bracketed profiles are cross-multiplied to get reaction rate, deviations from physical limits become pronounced.  This method was not pursued.

**Linear interpolation between mixing line and nearest limit**

Idea: one could fix one interpolation limit as the mixing line and find the nearest other limit that brackets the average concentration. Then interpolate between these lines.  

Outcome: 

**Blended limits**

Idea: One could generalize the Baldyga approach of blending a combination of limits. Possibilities include identifying subsets that are missing products and weighting those limits base on the products they produce.

Outcome:

**A new idea that appears to be generally applicable**

It became clear when considering the various methods above that if the profile of C(f) is not well-bracketed and respecting physical limits, closures will not work well. Expecting the solution to "find" the right bracketing limits from the precomputed static subsets is not realistic and additional information needs to come from somewhere in order to navigate subset-space and mixture-fraction-space.  Rationally combined or blended and dynamic limits, such as those in the 2009 and 2025 papers from Baldyga's group, looked more promising, although potentially internally inconsistent if the selected limits did not always bound the ODE average at all times. And it was not clear how such a combination could be determined and applied to a new and user-defined reaction system that differed significantly from the azo-coupling example we are using.

While thinking about the extra information that might help a closure to produce the correct solution in all cases, I often thought about how the kinetic parameters in the scheme contain useful information aboput which static limits might be relevant to a solution. That is also true of the reaction conditions, especially the inpiut concentrations of each substance, which determine to some degree what reaction pathways are relevant. I realized one day that it should be possible to extra from the ODE (or CFD) solution, which reflect all of these inputs, a trajectory that could be useful in defining the overall direction of the reactions in stoichiometric terms.  Like in Baldyga's 2009 and 2025 closure, a reaction system can be written in a single line that is stoichiometrically coorrect, even if the chemistry does not take place mechanistically in a single step.  I decided to use the ODE solution to determine the stoichiometruic coefficients in that overall reaction and then push it to maximum extent based on the reactants available. The idea was that this would form a limit that represented a subset combination of limits from the static set and would bound C(f) on one side while the mixing line could bound C(f) on the other.

I called this method "ray_limit", because in mathematical terms we are extracting from the ODE solution a ray (or arrow) that points in the direction in which the chemistry is travelling. A detailed mathematical description is available [here]().





Outcome:
